



Network Working Group                                        B. Sarikaya
Internet-Draft                                              Unaffiliated
Intended status: Standards Track                               R. Schott
Expires: 9 August 2024                                  Deutsche Telekom
                                                         6 February 2024


 Security and Privacy Implications of 3GPP AI/ML Networking Studies for
                                   6G
              draft-sarikaya-6gip-aiml-security-privacy-00

Abstract

   This document provides an overview of 3GPP work on Artificial
   Intelligence/ Machine Learning (AI/ML) networking.  Application areas
   and corresponding proposed modifications to the architecture are
   identified.  Security and privacy issues of these new applications
   need to be identified out of which IETF work could emerge.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 9 August 2024.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2024 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.











Sarikaya & Schott         Expires 9 August 2024                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft    AI/ML  security privacy implications     February 2024


   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Training and Federated Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   3.  Architecture  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   4.  Security and Privacy  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   5.  Work Points . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     5.1.  Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   6.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   7.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   8.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   9.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     9.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     9.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10

1.  Introduction

   Artificial Intelligence (AI) has historically been defined as the
   science and engineering to build intelligent machines capable of
   carrying out tasks as humans do.  Inspired from the way human brain
   works, machine learning (ML) is defined as the field of study that
   gives computers the ability to learn without being explicitly
   programmed.  Since it is believed that the main computational
   elements in a human brain are 86 billion neurons, the more popular ML
   approaches are using “neural network” as the model.  Neural networks
   (NN) take their inspiration from the notion that a neuron’s
   computation involves a weighted sum of the input values.  A
   computational neural network contains the neurons in the input layer
   which receive some values and propagate them to the neurons in the
   middle layer of the network, which is also called a “hidden layer”.
   The weighted sums from one or more hidden layers are ultimately
   propagated to the output layer, which presents the final outputs of
   the network.

   Neural networks having more than three layers, i.e., more than one
   hidden layer are called deep neural networks (DNN).  In contrast to
   the conventional shallow-structured NN architectures, DNNs, also
   referred to as deep learning, made amazing breakthroughs since 2010s



Sarikaya & Schott         Expires 9 August 2024                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft    AI/ML  security privacy implications     February 2024


   in many essential application areas because they can achieve human-
   level accuracy or even exceed human accuracy.  Deep learning
   techniques use supervised and/or unsupervised strategies to
   automatically learn hierarchical representations in deep
   architectures for classification.  With a large number of hidden
   layers, the superior performance of DNNs comes from its ability to
   extract high-level features from raw sensory data after using
   statistical learning over a large amount of data to obtain an
   effective representation of an input space.  In recent years, thanks
   to the big data obtained from the real world, the rapidly increased
   computation capacity and continuously-evolved algorithms, DNNs have
   become the most popular ML models for many AI applications.

   The performance of DNNs is gained at the cost of high computational
   complexity.  Hence more efficient compute engines are often used,
   e.g. graphics processing units (GPU) and network processing units
   (NPU).  Compared to the inference which only involves the feedforward
   process, the training often requires more computation and storage
   resources because it involves also the back propagation process.

   Many DNN models have been developed over the past two decades.  Each
   of these models has a different “network architecture” in terms of
   number of layers, layer types, layer shapes (i.e., filter size,
   number of channels and filters), and connections between layers.
   Three popular structures of DNNs: multilayer perceptrons (MLPs),
   convolution neural networks (CNNs), and recurrent neural networks
   (RNNs).  Multilayer perceptrons (MLP) model is the most basic DNN,
   which is composed of a series of fully connected layers.  In a fully
   connected layer, all outputs are connected to all inputs.  Hence MLP
   requires a significant amount of storage and computation.

   A convolution neural network (CNN) is composed of multiple
   convolutional layers.  Applying various convolutional filters, CNN
   models can capture the high-level representation of the input data,
   making it popular for image classification and speech recognition
   tasks.  Recurrent neural network (RNN) models are another type of
   DNNs, which use sequential data feeding.  The input of RNN consists
   of the current input and the previous samples.  RNN models have been
   widely used in the natural language processing task on mobile
   devices, e.g., language modeling, machine translation, question
   answering, word embedding, and document classification.

   AI/ML has very many applications, however, two areas have emerged
   that involve networking.  One is the network optimization, time-
   series forecasting, predictive maintenance, Quality of Experience
   (QoE) modeling and the other is speech recognition, image
   recognition, video processing.  In the former, the end device is the
   base station and the latter the UE [TR22.874].



Sarikaya & Schott         Expires 9 August 2024                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft    AI/ML  security privacy implications     February 2024


   This document aims to present Artificial Intelligence Machine
   Learning (AIML) networking issues that may require further protocol
   work, mostly on the security and privacy aspects of networking.

2.  Training and Federated Learning

   Training is a process in which an AI/ML model learns to perform its
   given tasks, more specifically, by optimizing the value of the
   weights in the DNN.  A DNN is trained by inputting a training set,
   which are often correctly-labelled training samples.  Taking image
   classification for instance, the training set includes correctly-
   classified images.  The training process is repeated iteratively to
   continuously reduce the overall loss.  Until the loss is below a
   predefined threshold, the DNN with high precision is obtained.  After
   a DNN is trained, it can perform its task by computing the output of
   the network using the weights determined during the training process,
   which is referred to as inference.  In the model inference process,
   the inputs from the real world are passed through the DNN.  Then the
   prediction for the task is output.  For instance, the inputs can be
   pixels of an image, sampled amplitudes of an audio wave or the
   numerical representation of the state of some system or game.
   Correspondingly, the outputs of the network can be a probability that
   an image contains a particular object, etc.

   With continuously improving capability of cameras and sensors on
   mobile devices, valuable training data, which are essential for AI/ML
   model training, are increasingly generated on the devices.  For many
   AI/ML tasks, the fragmented data collected by mobile devices are
   essential for training a global model.  In the traditional
   approaches, the training data gathered by mobile devices are
   centralized to the cloud datacenter for a centralized training.

   In Distributed Learning mode, each computing node trains its own DNN
   model locally with local data, which preserves private information
   locally.  To obtain the global DNN model by sharing local training
   improvement, nodes in the network will communicate with each other to
   exchange the local model updates.  In this mode, the global DNN model
   can be trained without the intervention of the cloud datacenter.

   In 3GPP Federated Learning (FL) mode, the cloud server trains a
   global model by aggregating local models partially-trained by each
   end devices.  The most agreeable Federated Learning algorithm so far
   is based on the iterative model averaging whereby within each
   training iteration, a UE performs the training based on the model
   downloaded from the AI server using the local training data.  Then
   the UE reports the interim training results (e.g., gradients for the
   DNN) to the cloud server via 5G uplink (UL) channels.  The server
   aggregates the gradients from the UEs, and updates the global model.



Sarikaya & Schott         Expires 9 August 2024                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft    AI/ML  security privacy implications     February 2024


   Next, the updated global model is distributed to the UEs via 5G DL
   channels.  Then the UEs can perform the training for the next
   iteration.

   Summarizing, we can say that distributed learning (DML) is about
   having centralized data but distributing the model training to
   different nodes, while federated learning (FL) is about having
   decentralized data and training and in effect having a central model
   [Srini21]

3.  Architecture

   A new framework for protocols called Service based architecture (SBA)
   comprises Network Functions (NFs) that expose services through
   RESTful APIs has been defined.  There are providers and consumers
   (publishers and subscribers) which are new functions in the system
   [IsNo20].

   3GPP core, i.e. 5GC network, aka mobile core network, which
   establishes reliable, secure connectivity to the network for end
   users and provides access to its services has a new server function:
   The Network Data Analytics Function (NWDAF) provides analytics to 5GC
   Network Functions (NFs) and Operations and Management (OAM).  An
   NWDAF may contain the Analytics logical function (AnLF): A logical
   function in NWDAF, which performs inference, derives analytics
   information and Model Training logical function (MTLF) which trains
   Machine Learning (ML) models and exposes new training services.  The
   Application AI/ML operation logic is controlled by an Application
   Function (AF).  Any AF request to the 5G System in the context of 5G
   System (5GS) (which consists of the 5GC (5G Core Network), 5G-AN (5G
   Access Network) and UE) assistance to Application AI/ML operation
   should be authorized by the 5GC [TR23.700-80].



















Sarikaya & Schott         Expires 9 August 2024                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft    AI/ML  security privacy implications     February 2024


   NWDAF relies on various sources of data input including data from 5G
   core NFs, AFs, 5G core repositories, e.g., Network Repository
   Function (NRF), Unified Data Management (UDM), etc., and OAM data,
   including performance measurements (PMs), Key Performance Indicators
   (KPIs), configuration management data and alarms.  An NWDAF may
   provide in turn analytics output results to 5G core NF, AFs, and OAM.
   Optionally, Data Collection Coordination Function (DCCF) and
   Messaging Framework Adaptor Function (MFAF) may be involved to
   distribute and collect repeated data towards or from various data
   sources.  Note that AF contains a Network Exposure Function (NEF) if
   it is an untrusted AF.  NEF may assist the AI/ML application server
   in scheduling available UE(s) to participate in the AI/ML operation
   (e.g.  Federated Learning).  Also, 5GC may assist the selection of
   UEs to serve as FL clients, by providing a list of target member
   UE(s), then subscribing to the NEF to be notified about the subset
   list of UE(s) (i.e. list of candidate UE(s)) that fulfill certain
   filtering criteria [TR23.700-82].

   [TR23.700-82] expands upon the data analytics as a useful tool to
   optimize the service offering by predicting events related to the
   network or UE conditions.  These services however can also assist the
   3rd party AI/ML application service provider for the AI/ML model
   distribution, transfer, training for various applications (e.g.,
   video/speech recognition, robot control, automotive).  This takes us
   to the concept of the application enablement layer can play role on
   the exposure of AI/ML services from different 3GPP domains to the
   Application Service Providers (ASP) in a unified manner.

4.  Security and Privacy

   AI/ML networking raises many security and privacy issues.
   [TR23.700-80] and [TR23.700-82] identify a number of key issues and
   [TR33.898] presents a study on one of the key issues which will be
   detailed here.

   [TR23.700-80] studies the exposure of different types of assistance
   information such as traffic rate, packet delay, packet loss rate,
   network condition changes, candidate FL members, geographical
   distribution information, etc. to AF for AI / ML operations.  Some of
   assistance information could be user privacy sensitive, such as
   candidate FL members, geographical distribution information etc.
   There is a need to study how to protect such privacy-related
   assistance information.  In addition, 5GC needs to determine which
   assistance information is required by AF to complete AI/ML operation
   and to avoid exposing information that is unnecessary for AI/ML
   operations.





Sarikaya & Schott         Expires 9 August 2024                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft    AI/ML  security privacy implications     February 2024


   Because of the use of Restful API which depend on the use of HTTP
   protocol, OAuth [RFC6749] protocol seems to be the natural choice
   here for authorization.

   One solution can be developed reusing existing mechanism for
   authorization of 5GC assistance information exposure to AF.  The
   solution is based on reusing the OAuth-based authorization mechanism
   OAuth [RFC6749] protocol which extends traditional client-server
   authentication by providing a third party client with a token.  Since
   such token resembles a different set of credentials compared to those
   of the resource owner, the device needs not be allowed to use the
   resource owner's credentials to access protected resources.

   UE privacy profile/local policies stored in a database can also be
   employed to authorize UE-related 5GC assistance information exposure.
   UE privacy profile/local policies may also contain protection
   policies that indicate how 5GC assistance information should be
   protected (e.g., encryption, integrity protection, etc.).  NWDAF via
   Network Exposure Function (NEF) sends the UE-related 5GC assistance
   information to AF when the local policies/UE privacy profile
   authorize the AF to access the information.  According to the local
   policies/UE privacy profiles, NWDAF may need to protect the 5GC
   assistance information with security mechanisms.

   Network Functions securely expose capabilities and events to 3rd
   party Application Functions (AF) via Network Exposure Function (NEF).
   The interface between the NEF and the Application Function needs
   integrity protection, replay protection, confidentiality protection
   for communication between the NEF and Application Function, and
   mutual authentication between the NEF and Application Function and
   protect internal 5G Core network information.  The NEF also enable
   secure provision of information in the 3GPP network by authenticated
   and authorized AFs.

   Security should be provided to support the protection of user privacy
   sensitive assistance information being exposed to AF.  TLS 1.3
   [RFC8446] is used to provide integrity protection, replay protection
   and confidentiality protection for the interface between the NEF and
   the AF [TS33.501].

5.  Work Points

   Security and privacy of AI/ML Networking based services and
   applications need further work.  [TR33.898] provides solutions to
   only one of many possible key issues.  Each key issue has been in
   depth investigated in [TR23.700-80] and [TR23.700-82] from which new
   solutions can be developed.




Sarikaya & Schott         Expires 9 August 2024                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft    AI/ML  security privacy implications     February 2024


   We list below only some of the key issues identified:

   *  enhance the mobile core network to expose information to the UE to
      facilitate its Application AI/ML operation (e.g.  Model Training,
      Splitting and inference feedback etc.)

   *  expose UE-related information to an AF ensuring that privacy and
      security requirements are met.

   *  additional parameters to be provisioned to the mobile core network
      by an external party for the assistance to Application AI/ML
      operation.

   *  Whether and how the existing the mobile core network data
      transfer/traffic routing mechanisms are re-used or enhanced to
      support the transmission of the Application AI/ML traffic(s)
      between AI/ML endpoints (i.e.  UE and AF)?

   *  information to be provided by the mobile core network to the AF
      can help the AF to select and manage the group of UEs which will
      be part of FL operation.

   *  enhancing the architecture and related functions to support
      application layer AI/ML services

   *  supporting federated learning at application enablement layers

   *  enhancing the architecture and related functions to support
      management and/or configuration for split AI/ML operation, and in-
      time transfer of AI/ML models.  The management and configuration
      aspects including discovery of required nodes for split AI/ML
      operation and support of different models of AI/ML operation
      splitting in which the AI/ML operation/model is split into
      multiple parts according to the current task and environment.

5.1.  Future Work

   A use case document is needed.  So far 3GPP identified many use cases
   and some of which are described above in this document.  All or some
   of these usage areas of AI/ML can further be elaborated in a use case
   document These use cases should make it clear why the security and
   privacy protocols are needed.









Sarikaya & Schott         Expires 9 August 2024                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft    AI/ML  security privacy implications     February 2024


   A problem statement on AI/ML networking document is needed.  Such a
   document should identify the problems that possibly need a new
   protocol to be developed or need to identify extensions to an
   existing protocol.  One possibility in that direction could be
   refining the work points identified above and formulating them in
   terms of existing or to be defined in the future security and privacy
   protocols.

6.  Security Considerations

   Security considerations of AI/ML Networking is TBD.

7.  IANA Considerations

   There are no IANA considerations for this document.

8.  Acknowledgements

   We acknowledge useful comments from Hesham ElBakoury.

9.  References

9.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2904]  Vollbrecht, J., Calhoun, P., Farrell, S., Gommans, L.,
              Gross, G., de Bruijn, B., de Laat, C., Holdrege, M., and
              D. Spence, "AAA Authorization Framework", RFC 2904,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2904, August 2000,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2904>.

   [RFC6749]  Hardt, D., Ed., "The OAuth 2.0 Authorization Framework",
              RFC 6749, DOI 10.17487/RFC6749, October 2012,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc6749>.

   [RFC8446]  Rescorla, E., "The Transport Layer Security (TLS) Protocol
              Version 1.3", RFC 8446, DOI 10.17487/RFC8446, August 2018,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8446>.

9.2.  Informative References

   [IsNo20]   Isaksson, M. and C. Norrman, "Secure Federated Learning in
              5G Mobile Networks", December 2020,
              <https://www.ericsson.com/en/reports-and-papers/research-
              papers/secure-federated-learning-5g>.







Sarikaya & Schott         Expires 9 August 2024                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft    AI/ML  security privacy implications     February 2024


   [Srini21]  Srinivasan, A., "Difference between distributed learning
              versus federated learning algorithms", November 2021,
              <https://www.kdnuggets.com/2021/11/difference-distributed-
              learning-federated-learning-algorithms.html>.

   [TR22.874] 3rd Generation Partnership Project, "Study on traffic
              characteristics and performance requirements for AI/ML
              model transfer in 5GS", December 2021.

   [TR23.700-80]
              3rd Generation Partnership Project, "Study on 5G System
              Support for AI/ML-based Services", December 2022.

   [TR23.700-82]
              3rd Generation Partnership Project, "Study on application
              layer support for AI/ML services", November 2023.

   [TR33.898] 3rd Generation Partnership Project, "Study on security and
              privacy of Artificial Intelligence/Machine Learning (AI/
              ML)-based services and applications in 5G", July 2023.

   [TS33.501] "Security Architecture and Procedures for 5G System",
              December 2023, <https://www.3gpp.org/ftp/Specs/
              archive/33_series/33.501/33501-i30.zip>.

Authors' Addresses

   Behcet Sarikaya
   Unaffiliated
   Email: sarikaya@ieee.org


   Roland Schott
   Deutsche Telekom
   Deutsche-Telekom-Allee 9
   64295 Darmstadt
   Germany
   Email: Roland.Schott@telekom.de













Sarikaya & Schott         Expires 9 August 2024                [Page 10]
